TechJobs Console (#2)
LaunchCodeEducation/csharp-web-dev-curriculum: content/assignments/techjobs-console/_index.md

---
title: "Assignment #1: Tech Jobs Console"
date: 2023-01-03T10:42:56-06:00
draft: false
weight: 3
originalAuthor: Sally Steuterman # to be set by page creator
originalAuthorGitHub: gildedgardenia # to be set by page creator
reviewer: # to be set by the page reviewer
reviewerGitHub: # to be set by the page reviewer
lastEditor: # update any time edits are made after review
lastEditorGitHub: # update any time edits are made after review
lastMod: # UPDATE ANY TIME CHANGES ARE MADE
---

## Introduction

Congratulations! Based on your hard work and strong coding skills, you have
been brought on as an apprentice to the LaunchCode Tech Team. You will be
paired with a mentor to help you get comfortable and continue learning.

The Company Team at LaunchCode works with employer partners to match qualified
programmers with apprenticeships. They asked for a new tool to be built to
help them easily manage data for currently available jobs. Over the next few
weeks, you will help them build this application alongside mentors from the
Tech Team.

> This first project will be a simple proof-of-concept prototype. It won't be

Reviewer: Proof of Concept - POC and Prototype represent two different phases of development. Might be nice too elaborate  a little to get students use to the vocabulary and principles in the development process.

pretty or have lots of features, but it will give you a chance to work through
some initial concepts and get feedback from LaunchCode staff.

> 

Reviewer: This is covered below in TechJobs (Console Edition)

Author: Got it!

{{< /rawhtml >}}

### Learning Objectives

In this project, you will show that you can:

1. Read and understand code written by others.
1. Use core C# syntax (methods, variables, loops, conditionals).
1. Utilize `List` and `Dictionary` collection types.
1. Work with console I/O via the `Console` class.
1. Work with data types and arrays.

## TechJobs (Console Edition)

The app you must help design is a simple console (i.e. command-line) prototype
of the new TechJobs app. It will allow LaunchCode staff to browse and search
listings of open jobs by employer partners.

The prototype process gives everybody a chance to work out some initial ideas
without investing a ton of time into developing a finished product. Once
everybody likes the prototype, the Tech Team will begin work toward a
full-fledged application.

### Your Assignment

Blake created a console application and started to fill in some features. His
code allows users to search job listings by one of several fields. It can also
display lists of all of the values of a given field in the system (e.g. all
employers, or all locations).

Blake has now handed the task off to you. You must add a couple of features and

> then get feedback from the Company Team.

Reviewer: From lines 27-29 above -> Proof of Concept - POC and Prototype represent two different phases of development. Lines 49 - 66 do a better job with explaining what it is the student is working on.  Might be nice too elaborate  a little more to get students use to the vocabulary and principles in the development process.

Author: Added new language to address this.

Reviewer: Thanks.

After you work through the tasks Blake has laid out for you, tackle one

> or more of the [bonus missions]({{< relref "./#bonus-missions" >}}).

Reviewer: From lines 27-29 above -> Proof of Concept - POC and Prototype represent two different phases of development. Lines 49 - 69 do a better job with explaining what it is the student is working on.  Might be nice too elaborate  a little more to get students use to the vocabulary and principles in the development process.

> or more of the [bonus missions]({{< relref "./#bonus-missions" >}}).

Reviewer: Please delete, seems an odd thing to mention here.

Author: Ok

## Getting Started

<!-- TODO: Add link back to Assignment 0 -->

In Canvas, **Graded Assignment #1: TechJobs Console** contains a GitHub Classroom assignment invitation link and then set up the project in Visual Studio. Refer back to the GitHub Classroom instructions from Assignment 0 for details. 

Before diving in and starting to code, make sure you understand what the code
you've been given does. Since you're starting with a functioning---albeit
unfinished---program, go ahead and run it to get an idea of how it works. To do

> this, right-click on the project that contains the `TechJobs` class and select *Run Project*.

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing - I right clicked on TechJobsConsoleAutograded6

Author: Changed the language a bit to help address confusion and encourage students to click around and explore.

{{% notice orange "Warning" "rocket" %}}

   The application will run until you force it to quit, re-prompting time

>    after time. To kill it, press the "stop" icon in the Run pane. We'll learn precisely how the program manages to work this way below.

Reviewer: Not sure where the stop icon is, I just typed x and hit enter to stop the program as instructed in the output.

Author: It is in the corner. Clarified in the text.

for programs to read in.

If CSV files are new to you, don't worry, they're easy to understand.
CSV files are conceptually similar to simple spreadsheets in that they
organize data in rows and columns. The major difference is that they
don't have the ability to carry out calculations the way spreadsheets
do, and you can easily open, read, and edit them in plain text editors.

Open up `jobs_data.csv`, which is in the project. You'll see that the first line is:

```console
   name,employer,location,position type,core competency
```

While it isn't required, the first line of a CSV file often represents
the column names. We have 5 names here, which indicates that each of our
rows in the CSV file should have 5 fields. In this file format, a **row**
corresponds to a new line. So each line below the first will constitute
a row of data, or a record.

Have a look at the data below line 1, and ask yourself the following
questions:

1. Which fields match up with which column names above?
1. Why do some lines/rows (e.g. line 10) have more commas than others, if
   commas are supposed to separate columns?
1. What role do the double-quotes play in lines 10 and 79?

## The TechJobs Class

> The `TechJobs` class contains the method that will drive our
> program's functionality. It contains three methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `TechJobs` class contains three methods that will drive our
program's functionality:
```

1. `RunProgram()` - The main application runner.
1. `GetUserSelection()` - A utility method that displays a menu of choices and
   returns the user's selection.

> 1. `PrintJobs()` - This is meant to print a list of jobs to the console in a
>    nicely formatted manner, but hasn't been implemented yet. This will be part
>    of your job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `PrintJobs()` - This is meant to print a list of jobs to the console in a
   nicely formatted manner, but hasn't been implemented yet. 
```

> Let's look at each of these.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a closer look at each method.
```

### The `RunProgram()` Method

The logic within `RunProgram()` presents menus in turn, and based on the
user's choice, takes appropriate action.

It begins by declaring two local variables: `actionChoices` and
`columnChoices`. These contain information relating to the menus that
we'll display, and we'll look at them in more detail later.

Next, we notice a `while loop` that starts `while (true)`. While we usually
want to avoid creating infinite loops, we have a good reason for doing so in
this case! We want our application to continually run until the user decides
they want to quit. The simplest way to do this is to loop forever. When the
user wants to quit our app, they can enter `x` at the initial `View jobs by` prompt. 

{{% notice blue "Note" "rocket" %}}

   There are two ways to stop a running app. Either option works so you can pick the one that works best for you!
   

>    1. Use the IDE.  Click Visual Studio's *Stop* icon.  The light red square that replaces the green *Run* triangle once an app is running.

Reviewer: I have a white *Stop* square that replaces a white *Run* triangle once the app is running.

Author: Removed reference to specific colors so it wouldn't be confusing.

Reviewer: Thanks.

>    1. Use the terminal. Press *ctrl+C* (a widely-known command to kill a console application). This will work in any terminal context, and not just for our console program in Visual Studio

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. In the terminal, pressing *ctrl+C* will also stop the program. This will work in any terminal context, and not just for our console program in Visual Studio
```

Reviewer: The original text comes off a little snarky.

{{% /notice %}}

The `RunProgram()` method can be summarized as follows:

1. Present the user with choices on how to view data: *list* or *search*.
1. Based on that choice, prompt them for the column to apply the choice to. In
   the case of a search, we also ask for a search term.
1. Carry out the request to the `JobData` class via one of its public
   methods.
1. Display the results of the request.
1. Repeat.

`RunProgram()` simulates a *query* to an external source:

1. We ask the method for data that originates from a non-C# source.
1. The method parses and filters that data.
1. The method presents the data in a useful manner.

### The `GetUserSelection()` Method

The `GetUserSelection()` method takes in a string to display above the
menu, to provide context for what they are being asked. It also takes in
a `Dictionary` with string keys and string values. How is this used? What
will this `Dictionary` contain when the method runs?

To figure this out, right-click on the method name and select *Find (All)
References*. This will open a pane and display each location in the program
where `GetUserSelection()` is called. The first such usage is the first

> line of the main `while loop`:

Reviewer: Maybe add a note that double clicking will take you to the instance in the code.

```csharp

>    string actionChoice = GetUserSelection("View Jobs", actionChoices);

Reviewer: Might be nice to add the line # here (30)

Author: Ok

Reviewer: Thanks.

```

What is this `Dictionary` named `actionChoices`? If we look a few lines
above, we see:

> ```csharp {linenos=true,linenostart=13}
>    // Top-level menu options
>    Dictionary<string, string> actionChoices = new Dictionary<string, string>();
>    actionChoices.Add("search", "Search");
>    actionChoices.Add("list", "List");

Reviewer: The line starts on line 11 

```suggestion
```csharp {linenos=true,linenostart=11}
   // Top-level menu options
   Dictionary<string, string> actionChoices = new Dictionary<string, string>();
   actionChoices.Add("search", "Search");
   actionChoices.Add("list", "List");
```

```

If you recall how the program worked when you ran it, the first menu
that you chose had two options, *Search* and *List*, which seem to
correspond to the entries in `actionChoices`. This is, in fact, the
case. This is the data that is used to generate the first menu we see
when running the program.

The second usage of `GetUserSelection()` is a few lines below:

> ```csharp {linenos=table,linenostart = 39}
>    string columnChoice = GetUserSelection("List", columnChoices);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```csharp {linenos=table,linenostart = 38}
   string columnChoice = GetUserSelection("List", columnChoices);
```

```

> This references `columnChoices`, which is declared at the top of
> `RunProgram()` and has a similar structure to `actionChoices` (they're the
> same data type and are used in calls to the same method, so this
> shouldn't be surprising). Most of the entries in `columnChoices`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This references `columnChoices`, which is declared in the 
`RunProgram()`method and has a similar structure to `actionChoices` (they're the
same data type and are used in calls to the same method). Most of the entries in `columnChoices`
```

correspond to columns in the jobs data set, but there's one additional
entry with key/value pair `"all"`/ `"All"`. These entries will help

> us present to the user the options for searching our data, which will
> correspond to searching within a given column, or searching all columns
> at once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
us present the user with the options for searching our data, which will
correspond to searching within a given column, or searching all columns
at once.
```

The keys in `actionChoices` and `columnChoices` represent the
*internal* strings we'll use to refer to these options (e.g. when representing
the user's menu choice, or querying data). The values in the `Dictionary` represent the
*external* way that these are represented to the user.

Within `GetUserSelection()` itself, most of the code is within a
`do-while loop`. A [do-while
loop](https://www.tutorialsteacher.com/csharp/csharp-do-while-loop)
is similar to a `while` loop, but the conditional check is at the
*end* of the loop's code block. This has the net consequence that the
loop's code block *always runs at least once*. At the end of the block's
execution, we check a condition to determine if we should run the block
again. This nicely mimics the behavior of simple menu-driven

> applications.

Reviewer: Have we defined menu-driven applications?

Author: They learn about them earlier.

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarification.

Within this loop, menu options are printed to the screen, and user input
is collected. If the input is valid, it returns the choice as a `string`
to the caller. This `string` corresponds to the chosen key (from
`choices`, which will be either `actionChoices` or
`columnChoices`) of the item the user selected. If invalid, it
re-prompts the user.

The local variable `choiceKeys` is used to easily enumerate the
`choices` `Dictionary`. In other words, it gives us a simple way to
provide an ordering to `choices`, which doesn't have an ordering of
its own.

> ## The `JobData` Class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The `JobData` Class `JobData.cs`
```

   assignment, know simply that they allow us to use properties and methods
   of a class without creating an object from that class. For example, we
   can call `JobData.FindAll()` from the `TechJob` class.

   If you want to create a new method in `JobData`, or add a property, be
   sure to declare it as `static`.

{{% /notice %}}

Let's look more closely at the data type of `AllJobs`. It purports to
be a `List` that stores `Dictionary` objects which have
`string` keys and `string` values. If we were to represent some of
this data visually, using `[]` for a `List` and `{}` for a collection of
key/value pairs (i.e., a `Dictionary`), it would look like this:

```csharp {linenos=table}
   [
       {
           "name": "Junior Data Analyst",
           "employer": "Lockerdome",
           "location": "Saint Louis",
           "position type": "Data Scientist / Business Intelligence",
           "core competency": "Statistical Analysis"
       },
       {
           "name": "Junior Web Developer",
           "employer": "Cozy",
           "location": "Portland",
           "position type": "Web - Back End",
           "core competency": "Ruby"
       },
       ...
   ]
```

> If you look at the `LoadData()` method you'll see a lot of unfamiliar code.
> Blake wrote this essential piece of code for you, and while you won't have to
> modify it, it will be useful to have an idea of how it works. Read
> through the code until you feel like you can describe its functionality
> at a basic level.

Reviewer: Suggestion add a walk through of the code here and add some more comments in the starter code to help students.

```suggestion
If you look at the `LoadData()` method you'll see a lot of unfamiliar code.
Blake wrote this essential piece of code for you, and while you won't have to
modify it, it will be useful to have an idea of how it works. 
```

Author: Appreciate the suggestion, but this is similar to asks we have already made of the students. They need to be comfortable reviewing unfamiliar code without walkthroughs and comments in order to be job-ready.

Reviewer: Lets reevaluate after the first class has completed this assignment and provided feedback.

There are three more methods in `JobData`, each of which is public
(and `static`, per our earlier note): 
- `FindAll()`
- `FindAll(string)`
- `FindByColumnAndValue(string, string)`. 

Note that there are two methods named `FindAll()`, but this is allowed in
C# via a feature called **overloading**. Overloading happens when
multiple methods have the same name, but they each have different input
parameters (also called argument lists). Read more about

> [overloading](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/c-sharp-method-overloading/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[overloading](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/c-sharp-method-overloading/) here.
```

> Here are some questions to ask yourself while reading this code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Questions to ask yourself while reading thru this code:
```

Author: Thru is only to be used in really informal writing or when talking about drive-thru restaurants and ATMS.

Reviewer: While I appreciate the reply based on Grammarly's interpretation. Thru is also used in place of through in less formal places.

1. What is the data type of a "job" record?
1. Why does `FindAll(string)` return something of type `List<string>`
   while `FindByColumnAndValue(string, string)` and `FindAll()` return
   something of type `List<Dictionary<string, string>>`?
1. Why is `LoadData()` called at the top of each of these four methods? Does
   this mean that we load the data from the CSV file each time one of them
   is called?

## Your Tasks

<!-- TODO: Add reference back to Assignment 0 -->

> Before diving into your tasks, review Assignment 0 for details on running the autograding tests for this assignment. This assignment has multiple tests, and we highly recommend the following workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before diving into your tasks, review Assignment 0 for details on running autograding tests in C#. This assignment has multiple tests, and we recommend the following workflow:
```

> 1. Write the code for the task, verifying manually that it works by running the `TechJobsConsoleAutograded` project.
> 1. When you think you've completed a task, run the individual test that corresponds to the task. 
> 1. If the test fails, review the test output and go back to your code to try to fix it.
> 1. Once the single test passes, run *all* of the tests to make sure you didn't break any tests that previously passed.
> 1. Repeat this process until all tests pass. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Write the code for the task, verify manually that it works by running the `TechJobsConsoleAutograded` project.
1. When you think you've completed a task, run the individual test that corresponds to the task. 
1. If the test fails, review the test output and go back to your code to fix the bug.
1. Once the single test passes, run *all* of the tests to make sure you didn't break any tests that previously passed.
1. Repeat this process until all tests pass. 
```

Now we'll outline the tasks for your first apprenticeship assignment.

### Implement `PrintJobs()`

When trying out the program, and later when reading the code, you
hopefully noticed that there's some work to do in the `PrintJobs()`
method. As it stands, it currently just prints a message:
`"PrintJobs is not implemented yet"`.

> Complete this method. It should print out jobs *in this precise format*:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Complete this method. Print out jobs *using the below format*:
```

```bash
   *****
   position type: Data Scientist / Business Intelligence
   name: Sr. IT Analyst (Data/BI)
   employer: Bull Moose Industries
   location: Saint Louis
   core competency: Statistical Analysis
   *****

   *****
   position type: Web - Back End
   name: Ruby specialist
   employer: LaunchCode
   location: Saint Louis
   core competency: Javascript
   *****
```

For the autograding script to correctly grade your code, you'll need to match this format *exactly*. In particular, note the number of asterisks surrounding each listing, and the blank line between listings.

If there are no results, it should print `No results`. Again, you should use this *exact* message.

{{% notice orange "Warning" "rocket" %}}

   To create new lines for your output, use `Environment.NewLine`.  

{{% /notice %}}

> Using the `Environment.NewLine`  will allow the autograding unit tests pass regardless of your operating system.  `\n` is a new line in Mac OS, but will be read as `\r\n` in Windows.    Read about the differences in line breaks [here](https://dev.to/pieter/why-windows-uses-rn-newlines-instead-of-n-126l).  Read more about how `Environment.NewLine` [works](https://www.dotnetperls.com/newline).

Reviewer: This is making it more complicated than it should be, best practices is to use Environment.Newline

```suggestion
Traditionally `\n` is a new line in Mac OS and `\r\n` is new line in Windows. `Environment.NewLine`  is the universal way to create a new line and works regardless of your operating system.  Allowing code written on a Mac to pass unit tests when the same code is run on Windows.
```

{{% notice blue "Note" "rocket" %}}

   To do this, you'll need to iterate over a `List` of jobs. Each
   job is itself a `Dictionary`. While you can get each of the items out of
   the `Dictionary` using the known keys (`employer`, `location`, etc.),
   think instead about creating a nested loop to loop over each
   `Dictionary`. If a new field is added to the job records, this approach
   will print out the new field without any updates to `PrintJobs()`.

> 

Reviewer: What is this referencing?  Should this come before the Environment.newline information?

Author: It is more of a hint. Changed to a tip box so it would stand out more as a hint.

Author: Tried switching it around. Let me know your thoughts!

Reviewer: Like it as a tip.

{{% /notice %}}

Test this method before moving on to your next step:

1. Save your changes.
1. Run the project.
1. Select "1" to list the jobs, and then "0" to list them all.
1. Make sure the printout matches the styling above.
1. Test that it prints a descriptive message if no jobs are found by selecting
   "0" to search and then "3" to search for a location. Then enter a location

>    that is not in the data (e.g. "Cancun"). Your message should be displayed.

Reviewer: This seems to be the test manually part of the recommended steps.  Please rework Implement Print Jobs section to flow better and align with the steps students should follow. Based on lines 338 - 342.

Author: Done! This is truly the last stage of the task so it should stay at the bottom.

Reviewer: Is there a test they should run and pass at this point?  The lines I was referencing have moving to the Assignment #1: Tech Jobs Console lines 79 to 83.  This seems to just be step 1 what about step 2 -5? Does that not apply in this instance? 

1. Write the code for the task, verify manually that your code works by running the TechJobsConsoleAutograded project.
2. When you think you’ve completed a task, run the individual test that corresponds to the task.
3. If the test fails, review the test output and go back to your code to fix the bug.
4. Once the single test passes, run all of the tests to make sure you didn’t break any tests that previously passed.
5. Repeat this process until all tests pass.

Author: Gotcha! Added a note to this effect.

> ### Create Method `FindByValue()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Complete the `FindByValue()` Method
```

At this stage, the application will allow users to search a *given
column* of the data for a given string. Your next task is to enable a
search that looks for the search term in *all* of the columns.

In the `JobData` class, find the method `FindByValue()`. This method has been outlined

> for you but contains none of the code needed to work (you should leave the `LoadData()` call as the first line of the method, however). Here are a few observations:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for you but contains none of the code needed to work (leave the `LoadData()` call as the first line of the method). Here are a few observations:

```

1. The code that you write should not contain duplicate jobs. So, for example, if a listing has position type "Web - Front End" and name "Front end web dev" then searching for "web" should not include the listing twice.

> 1. As with `PrintJobs()`, you should write your code in a way that if a new column is added to the data, your code will automatically search the new column as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. As with `PrintJobs()`, write your code in a way that if a new column is added to the data, your code will automatically search the new column as well.
```

> 1. You should NOT write code that calls `FindByColumnAndValue()` once for each column. Rather, utilize loops and collection methods as you did above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Do NOT write code that calls `FindByColumnAndValue()` once for each column. Rather, utilize loops and collection methods.
```

> 1. You *should*, on the other hand, read and understand `FindByColumnAndValue()`, since your code will look similar in some ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Reading and understanding `FindByColumnAndValue()`, will help as your code will look similar in some ways.
```

You've completed your first two tasks!

Let's assume you demonstrated the updated application for the Company Team, and
they noticed a feature that could be improved. When searching for jobs with
the skill `"JavaScript"` some results were missing (e.g. the Watchtower
Security job on line 31 of the CSV file). The search methods turn out to be
case-sensitive, so they treat `"JavaScript"` and `"Javascript"` as different
strings.

The Company Team strongly requested that this needs to be fixed, and of course
you told them that you are up to the task.

Here are some questions to ask yourself as you get started:

1. Which methods are called when searching?
1. How is the user's search string compared against the values of fields of the job `Dictionary` objects?
1. How can you make this comparison in a way that effectively ignores the case of the strings?
1. How can you do this *without* altering the capitalization of the items in `AllJobs` so that the data gets printed out the same way that it appears in `job_data.csv`?

<!-- TODO: Add reference to string methods section in string chapter -->

You might find it useful to review the String methods listed in the
chapter.

> When this task is completed, you're done!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this task is completed, you're ready to submit your assignment.
```

## Sanity Check

Before submitting, make sure that your application:

1. Prints each field of a job when using search functionality, and when listing all columns. If there are no search results, a descriptive message is displayed.
1. Allows the user to search for a string across all columns.
1. Returns case-insensitive results.

> 

Reviewer: Would we want to say something about passing the tests here?

Author: Added it.

Reviewer: Thanks.

## How to Submit

<!-- TODO: Add link back to Assignment 0 -->

To turn in your assignment and get credit, follow the submission instructions.

## Bonus Missions

> If you want to take your learning a few steps further, here are some
> additional problems you can try to solve. We're not providing you much
> guidance here, but we have confidence that you can figure these problems
> out!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to take your learning a few steps further, here are some
additional features the company team thinks would be nice to have in our app. We're not providing you much
guidance here, but we have confidence that you can figure how to implement these enhanced features!
```
